max_connection – Indicates the number of allowed connections to the database. If you receive the error message “Too many connections,” you may want to increase this value.query_cache_size – States the size of the cache for MySQL queries waiting to run. It is recommended to start with a smaller value of around 10MB and increase it to 100-200MB or less. Waiting for cache lock queries can occur in a chain if there are too many cached queries. If your queries continue to be backed up, we recommend you use EXPLAIN to evaluate each query and find a more efficient way.innodb_io_capacity – This variable sets the I/O rate from the storage device. This is directly related to storage drive type and speed. A 5400 rpm HDD has much less capacity than a high-end SSD or Intel Optane. You can adjust this value to match your hardware.innodb_buffer_pool_size – This setting considers system memory as the database data cache. Increase this value if you have large chunks of data. Note the RAM required to run other system resources. max_connection – Indicates the number of allowed connections to the database. If you receive the error message “Too many connections,” you may want to increase this value.query_cache_size – States the size of the cache for MySQL queries waiting to run. It is recommended to start with a smaller value of around 10MB and increase it to 100-200MB or less. Waiting for cache lock queries can occur in a chain if there are too many cached queries. If your queries continue to be backed up, we recommend you use EXPLAIN to evaluate each query and find a more efficient way.
innodb_io_capacity – This variable sets the I/O rate from the storage device. This is directly related to storage drive type and speed. A 5400 rpm HDD has much less capacity than a high-end SSD or Intel Optane. You can adjust this value to match your hardware.
innodb_buffer_pool_size – This setting considers system memory as the database data cache. Increase this value if you have large chunks of data. Note the RAM required to run other system resources. 
max_connection – Indicates the number of allowed connections to the database. If you receive the error message “Too many connections,” you may want to increase this value.
